Two use cases that were particularly contentious were those related to the creation or modification of images and figures, and the creation of synthetic data. Both these cases might have different connotations in diverse research fields. An important observation in relation to the research integrity assessment is that many respondents elaborate in the open text field of the survey [37], that their integrity assessment of the use of GenAI depends on it being used critically and reflexively. As one respondent puts it:
“Although I have answered in many cases that using AI is excellent practice, this does not mean that it should be used uncritically or without checking references etc. I just consider AI as giving an excellent head start on all of these tasks” (ID19826).
The qualitative comments, allowing respondents to contextualise their responses, contain several descriptions indicating a lack of trust in GenAI. The main problems mentioned are hallucination (that the chatbot “makes up” information), violation of privacy rights and copyrights (not knowing what is allowed to be fed into e.g. GenAI tools), potential biases, and ’black boxing’ of the generative process.
Generally, we observe a moderate positive correlation between the research integrity assessment of use cases and their admitted use by respondents (Kendall's τ = .44) or their colleagues (τ = .5). Some exceptions are the use of GenAI to identify potential collaborators and to create synthetic datasets (relatively low use), and to propose a title, keyword or abstract or even help draft parts of the body of an article (with relatively high admitted use). For all use cases, the reported use of GenAI of direct colleagues is higher than that of respondents themselves, with particularly large relative differences for the two use cases related to the peer review process (identifying strengths and weaknesses of manuscripts under review and writing review reports). This is in line with what is found in other surveys, e.g. focusing on questionable research practices and malpractice [32].
